README.md, before:

# STAC Manager

**Modular Pipeline Orchestration for STAC Collections**

[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

---

## What is STAC Manager?

STAC Manager is a Python library for building, orchestrating, and executing modular STAC data pipelines. It enables you to ingest STAC items from APIs or files, transform and enrich Item metadata from external input data (JSON/CSV), validate Item compliance, extend Items with extension properties, and output to various formats—all through declarative YAML configuration or a programmatic Python API.

Built on the **Pipes and Filters** architecture, STAC Manager provides 7 specialized modules that compose into powerful workflows while maintaining simplicity and testability.

---

## Key Features

- 🔌 **Modular Architecture**: 7 pipeline modules (Ingest, Seed, Transform, Update, Validate, Extension, Output)
- 📝 **Declarative Configuration**: Define workflows in YAML with full validation
- 🔄 **Streaming Pipeline**: Process millions of items with constant memory usage
- 🎯 **Wildcard Patterns**: Bulk update assets using `assets.*` syntax with template variables
- ✅ **STAC Compliance**: Built-in validation using `stac-validator`
- 🎯 **Matrix Strategies**: Run parallel pipelines for multiple collections
- 💾 **Checkpoint Resume**: Recover from failures without re-processing completed items
- 🐍 **Python 3.12+**: Modern type hints and structural pattern matching

---

## Quick Example

```yaml
# workflow.yaml
name: ingest-and-validate
steps:
  - id: fetch
    module: IngestModule
    config:
      mode: api
      source: https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1
      collection_id: sentinel-2-l2a
      max_items: 100

  - id: validate
    module: ValidateModule
    depends_on: [fetch]
    config:
      strict: true

  - id: output
    module: OutputModule
    depends_on: [validate]
    config:
      base_dir: ./outputs
      format: json
```

Run it:

```bash
stac-manager run-workflow workflow.yaml
```

---

## Installation

**Requirements**: Python 3.12+

### Via pip (recommended)

```bash
pip install stac-manager
```

### Via Poetry

```bash
poetry add stac-manager
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/DecentralizedGeo/stac-manager.git
cd stac-manager
poetry install
```

Verify installation:

```bash
stac-manager --version
```

---

## Next Steps

- 📖 **[Installation Guide](docs/user-guide/installation.md)** - Detailed setup instructions
- 🚀 **[Quickstart](docs/user-guide/quickstart.md)** - Run your first workflow in 5 minutes
- 📚 **[Architecture Guide](docs/spec/stac-manager-v1.0.0/00-system-overview.md)** - Pipes and Filters model
- 🔧 **[Module Reference](docs/spec/stac-manager-v1.0.0/)** - Complete module documentation

---

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## Acknowledgments

Built with:
- [PySTAC](https://pystac.readthedocs.io/) - STAC data models
- [pystac-client](https://pystac-client.readthedocs.io/) - STAC API client
- [stac-validator](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-validator) - STAC validation
- [stac-geoparquet](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-geoparquet) - Parquet conversion

Commit message:

Add work-in-progress notice to README

README.md, after:

# STAC Manager

**Modular Pipeline Orchestration for STAC Collections**

[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)

---

## What is STAC Manager?

STAC Manager is a Python library for building, orchestrating, and executing modular STAC data pipelines. It enables you to ingest STAC items from APIs or files, transform and enrich Item metadata from external input data (JSON/CSV), validate Item compliance, extend Items with extension properties, and output to various formats—all through declarative YAML configuration or a programmatic Python API.

Built on the **Pipes and Filters** architecture, STAC Manager provides specialized modules that compose into powerful workflows while maintaining simplicity and testability.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> STAC Manager is a work in progress with new functionality added frequently.

---

## Key Features

- 🔌 **Modular Architecture**: 7 pipeline modules (Ingest, Seed, Transform, Update, Validate, Extension, Output)
- 📝 **Declarative Configuration**: Define workflows in YAML with full validation
- 🔄 **Streaming Pipeline**: Process millions of items with constant memory usage
- 🎯 **Wildcard Patterns**: Bulk update assets using `assets.*` syntax with template variables
- ✅ **STAC Compliance**: Built-in validation using `stac-validator`
- 🎯 **Matrix Strategies**: Run parallel pipelines for multiple collections
- 💾 **Checkpoint Resume**: Recover from failures without re-processing completed items
- 🐍 **Python 3.12+**: Modern type hints and structural pattern matching

---

## Quick Example

```yaml
# workflow.yaml
name: ingest-and-validate
steps:
  - id: fetch
    module: IngestModule
    config:
      mode: api
      source: https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/stac/v1
      collection_id: sentinel-2-l2a
      max_items: 100

  - id: validate
    module: ValidateModule
    depends_on: [fetch]
    config:
      strict: true

  - id: output
    module: OutputModule
    depends_on: [validate]
    config:
      base_dir: ./outputs
      format: json
```

Run it:

```bash
stac-manager run-workflow workflow.yaml
```

---

## Installation

**Requirements**: Python 3.12+

### Via pip (recommended)

```bash
pip install stac-manager
```

### Via Poetry

```bash
poetry add stac-manager
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/DecentralizedGeo/stac-manager.git
cd stac-manager
poetry install
```

Verify installation:

```bash
stac-manager --version
```

---

## Next Steps

- 📖 **[Installation Guide](docs/user-guide/installation.md)** - Detailed setup instructions
- 🚀 **[Quickstart](docs/user-guide/quickstart.md)** - Run your first workflow in 5 minutes
- 📚 **[Architecture Guide](docs/spec/stac-manager-v1.0.0/00-system-overview.md)** - Pipes and Filters model
- 🔧 **[Module Reference](docs/spec/stac-manager-v1.0.0/)** - Complete module documentation

---

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## Acknowledgments

Built with:
- [PySTAC](https://pystac.readthedocs.io/) - STAC data models
- [pystac-client](https://pystac-client.readthedocs.io/) - STAC API client
- [stac-validator](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-validator) - STAC validation
- [stac-geoparquet](https://github.com/stac-utils/stac-geoparquet) - Parquet conversion
